“Jehovah is with you, you mighty warrior.”
With those words, Jehovah’s angel
greeted faithful Judge Gideon,
but his reply to those words
might surprise you.
Would you open your Bibles?
Let’s read together Judges 6:13,
that’s Judges 6:13:
“At this Gideon said to him:
“‘Pardon me, my lord,
“‘but if Jehovah is with us,
“‘why has all of this come upon us?
“‘Where are all his wonderful acts
that our fathers related to us, saying,
“‘“Did Jehovah not bring us up out of Egypt?”
“‘Now Jehovah has deserted us
and given us into Midian’s hand.’”
Well, is that how you would respond
to an angel of Jehovah
who is speaking to you?
Well, probably not
under normal circumstances.
But what about in 2020?
This has truly been an incredible year!
We have faced a pandemic—
a pandemic that has robbed us
of our dear loved ones,
a pandemic that has caused us
to face isolation,
to be separated from our relatives
and close friends
so that now an epidemic of anxiety
has settled down across our earth.
At times during this year,
maybe you have felt like Gideon.
Maybe his words have been your words.
Well, what does that mean?
If you have said those things
or felt those things,
does it mean that you’re lacking faith?
Does it mean that your love for Jehovah
is disappearing
or that now you’re sort of diminishing
in your relationship with God?
Not at all.
Gideon was not
the only faithful servant of Jehovah
who expressed similar thoughts.
Do you remember what Habakkuk said?
Let’s open our Bibles.
Let’s read together Habakkuk chapter 1
and verses 2 and 3.
Habakkuk said: “How long, O Jehovah,
“must I cry for help, but you do not hear?
“How long must I ask for help from violence,
“but you do not intervene?
“Why do you make me witness wrongdoing?
“And why do you tolerate oppression?
“Why are destruction and violence before me?
And why do quarreling and conflict abound?”
Why? Why? Why?
Well, maybe those words
sound a little bit familiar to you.
But brothers, when we feel overwhelmed
by our circumstances, by our grief,
by our anxiety,
there is a question that we need to ask.
Now, this is a question
that was first recorded in the Bible
from the faithful prophet Elisha.
Now, would you read it with me?
It’s at 2 Kings chapter 2
and verse 14
—2 Kings 2:14.
It says: “Then he
[Now, this is Elisha. Then he]
“took the official garment of Elijah
that had fallen off him
“and struck the waters and said:
“‘Where is Jehovah, the God of Elijah?’
“When he struck the waters,
“they were divided
to the left and to the right,
so that Elisha went across.”
What is the question?
“Where is Jehovah?”
Now, what did Elisha mean
when he asked that question?
Was he saying: “Where is Jehovah?
Why isn’t he doing something?”
Is that the sense of the question?
Not at all.
Elisha was looking for Jehovah.
He was searching for his direction.
He wanted to see the hand of God.
Well, Elisha got the answer to his prayer.
Those waters opened right in front of him
so that he could cross.
Well, this is not the only place
where this question appears in the Bible.
Let’s look at another place
here in Jeremiah chapter 2,
Jeremiah 2:5:
“This is what Jehovah says:
“‘What fault did your forefathers find in me,
“‘so that they strayed so far from me,
“‘and they walked after worthless idols
and became worthless themselves?
“‘They did not ask,
[now notice, they did not ask]
“‘“Where is Jehovah,
“‘“the One who brought us
out of the land of Egypt,
“‘“who led us through the wilderness,
through a land of deserts and pits,
“‘“through a land of drought
and of deep shadow,
“‘“through a land where no man travels
and where no humans dwell?”’”
What’s the point?
Jehovah wanted his people to search for him.
He wanted them to ask: “Where is Jehovah?”
—to look for his hand,
to seek his help and direction.
Well, now, brothers,
why is it so urgent for us
during these critical times
—during a pandemic—
to be saying, “Where is Jehovah?”
Because we so desperately need
the help, the direction,
the support, the comfort
that come from our amazing,
our wonderful God, Jehovah.
But now you might say:
“Well, is Jehovah really going to help you?
“Is Jehovah really going to help me?
“I’m not important. I’m not significant.
Is Jehovah really going to be there for me?”
Well, look at these beautiful words
in the scripture in Isaiah chapter 57
—Isaiah chapter 57,
which is really a promise
from our God, Jehovah.
Isaiah 57:15 says:
“For this is
what the High and Lofty One says,
“who lives forever and whose name is holy:
“‘I reside in the high and holy place,
“‘[but now notice this]
“‘but also with those crushed
“‘and lowly in spirit,
“‘to revive the spirit of the lowly
and to revive the heart
of those being crushed.’”
What an amazing thought!
Here our God, Jehovah, the Almighty
who dwells in the highest heavens,
says that when we are crushed,
when we are lowly
—in a figurative sense—
he resides right with us.
How beautiful! How amazing!
Well, now, what does that mean?
What does that teach us?
It teaches us
that we need to ask that question
“Where is Jehovah?” every day.
We need to beg Jehovah for his direction.
We need to beg him for his help.
But then we need to do something more.
We need to be on the lookout
for the hand of Jehovah.
When Elijah felt completely isolated,
when he was so discouraged,
you remember, he said:
“I am the only one left.”
He just poured his heart out to Jehovah.
And what did Jehovah do for him?
Well, you remember,
Jehovah allowed Elijah to see
a miraculous display of his power.
Remember, he felt that wind;
he felt the earthquake;
he felt the fire.
But, you know, the Bible says:
“Jehovah was not in the wind.”
“Jehovah was not in the earthquake.”
“Jehovah was not in the fire.”
But then what came next?
“A calm, low voice.”
That was Jehovah.
Well, now, what do we learn
from that experience?
Sometimes, brothers, we might be waiting
for some big, bold, dramatic expression
of Jehovah’s hand.
But in reality, what do we need to do?
We need to turn up
our “spiritual hearing aids”
so that we can hear
the “calm, low voice” of Jehovah.
You see, Jehovah’s answer to our prayers
might come in a way that we don’t expect.
Maybe it’s through the kind gesture or act
of one of our brothers or sisters.
Maybe it’s through a text message,
an e-mail, a phone call,
or some other way
that our brother or sister acts
to show their kindness.
Maybe that’s Jehovah’s way
of giving us the help that we need.
That means
that when we are earnestly praying,
when we’re earnestly seeking Jehovah’s help
—be attentive, be alert,
ask: “Where is Jehovah?”
and look for his hand.
But now here’s another question, brothers:
When that help comes,
when Jehovah does provide
that assistance that you need,
will you be willing to accept it?
When Mary came to Jesus
with the perfumed oil, genuine nard
—remember, so expensive
that it would cost a year’s wages
for an average laborer—
it would have been so easy for Jesus
to turn her away,
to just say: “Oh, no, Mary,
thank you very much, but I don’t need you.
“Jehovah is going to help me,
so you can just go now,
and I’ll be fine.”
Jesus didn’t do that.
Jesus willingly accepted the help.
Now, maybe Jesus understood
that Jehovah had put it into Mary’s heart
to do this
so that his body
would be properly prepared for burial.
We don’t know.
But the point is, Jesus accepted
the help that Mary provided.
Well, brothers and sisters,
what’s the lesson?
What do we need to learn from this?
If you’re a person who always says,
“Oh, no, we’re fine; we don’t need anything;
Jehovah is going to help us,”
or, “Oh, no, you don’t need to tell me that;
I already know Jehovah
will give me the direction I need,”
well, then, you may be missing out.
We may not be seeing or hearing
the help that Jehovah wants to give us.
Let’s watch a video and see
how our brothers and sisters in distress
have experienced the help of Jehovah
at a critical time.
I thought that fire was loud.
I thought that you could hear a wildfire,
and it was just dead quiet.
By the time we went down the driveway
and around the corner,
we stopped and looked back
and the back of my parents’ house
was on fire.
When the pandemic hit, we lost our work.
We couldn’t go to work,
and we also couldn’t leave our apartment.
The situation was very hard.
My husband, Ivan, was charged
with organizing extremist activity.
He was put into pretrial detention
for four months.
I found out that I had a tumor in my chest
and I would have to have
a very serious operation.
I lost my mom to the coronavirus.
Living 3,000 miles apart,
it would be a long time
before I was able to go home at all,
and I wasn’t able to be there
when it happened.
Earlier this year, my son, Nathan, died
in a tragic accident.
He was two years old.
At that time, I asked Jehovah (the question),
“Why is this happening to me?ʺ
There were friends there before we got there.
Before we got to the place that we knew
we were going to evacuate to,
(because they asked,
“Where are you going to be?”)
they were willing to just provide anything
that we needed
before we even knew
what it was that we needed
—and especially spiritually.
Even when I didn’t know
that we needed to say a prayer, it was there.
In those moments, we saw Jehovah’s hand.
Brothers would come by and give us food.
There was even a brother that called me
when things started to go bad and said,
“I think you’re going to need some money.”
And without saying anything, he came
and left an envelope outside our apartment.
When we opened the envelope, we saw
that there was exactly the amount we needed
to pay the bills and to buy things
that we needed for the apartment.
I had only learned about brotherly love,
but during that time,
I really understood what it truly means.
During that time, brothers
who we did not even know called us,
they spent time with us,
they prayed with us,
they spent a lot of their time
encouraging us.
During that time, I saw evidence
of Jehovah’s hand in our lives.
I was really, really struggling one day,
and I had to reach out to Jehovah in prayer
and just try and throw all my burdens on him,
and not two minutes
after I finished that prayer
is when an elder reached out to me
and gave me the best shepherding call
I think I’ve ever had in my life.
And clearly, that was
Jehovah reaching out to me
and trying to show me that he understood
how I felt and was there for me.
After intensive care, I felt that I needed
someone to hold my hand,
so I understood that Jehovah
would take me by the hand.
A sister visited me every day,
she helped me get dressed,
she brushed my hair,
and we went for short walks
along the corridor.
Now I can really see how compassionate
and considerate Jehovah is
and that he knows how to support us.
He knows us inside and out.
While we were going through
this difficult time,
Jehovah helped us so much,
and we definitely saw his hand in our lives.
And in the future,
if any difficulty should occur,
we are confident
that Jehovah will help us and protect us.
It doesn’t matter what we face,
it’ll get worse and worse in this system.
But we know that Jehovah
can get us through absolutely anything.
I’ve seen the overwhelming evidence
in my own life;
I’ve seen it for others too.
And whatever Satan throws at us,
it doesn’t matter,
because Jehovah is stronger.
He’s the most powerful ally
that we could have.
At this annual meeting, we have heard so much
about what the Governing Body,
under the direction
of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus,
are doing to strengthen
Jehovah’s people worldwide.
But brothers and sisters,
do you know one thing
that is strengthening the Governing Body
to continue on in our work?
It’s you.
It’s every one of you brothers and sisters
out in the field.
We know what you’re going through.
We read your cards and letters.
We hear your expressions.
We know you’re suffering
through a difficult time.
And yet you keep going; you keep enduring;
you keep serving Jehovah faithfully.
That not only warms our hearts
but it strengthens our own faith
to continue serving Jehovah.
We are facing a challenging time now.
And as we face the great tribulation,
we will face even greater challenges.
We may have times of discouragement
just like Gideon had, just like Habakkuk had,
just as Elijah had.
But we will also prove faithful to the end
just as each of those men did.
If we do what?
If we keep looking for Jehovah,
if we keep searching for his hand,
if we keep turning up
our “spiritual hearing aids”
so that we can be attentive to the ways
that Jehovah will use to help us
and to strengthen us and to direct us.
Yes, dear brothers and sisters,
keep on asking,
“Where is Jehovah?”